swapping the expensive, recurring-cost GSM module for a cheaper,
one-time-cost Wi-Fi module (the ESP8266) and a free service (IFTTT).



1.  The Prototype Method & Hardware Setup
new method is to use a Wi-Fi microcontroller to send web-based alerts. 
The alert system relies on your phone's Wi-Fi hotspot for internet access.

The "Brain" (ESP8266 NodeMCU): 
This replaces the Arduino Uno. It's a powerful microcontroller with built-in Wi-Fi. You will program it using the exact same Arduino IDE.

The Accelerometer (MPU-6050): 
This is the sensor that will detect the high G-force of a crash.

The Location Sensor (NEO-6M GPS Module): 
This remains the same and will get the car's precise latitude and longitude.

Your Phone's Hotspot:
This is the critical link. The ESP8266 will connect to your phone's hotspot to get internet access.

The Alert System (IFTTT Service): 
This is a free web service. You'll create an "Applet" that works like this: 
IF the ESP8266 sends a simple web request, 
THEN IFTTT will send an SMS, an app notification, or an email to your emergency contacts.

2. 🖥️ How to Simulate This Project

Proteus is great at simulating local electronics, but it cannot simulate a real internet connection to the IFTTT service.

The best "simulation" for this project is a "Bench Test" using the real hardware, which is cheap enough to buy and test on your desk. You'll use the Arduino IDE's "Serial Monitor" and "Serial Plotter" as your simulation tools.

How to "Simulate" (Bench Test):

Connect your ESP8266 to your computer.

Connect the MPU-6050 to the ESP8266.

Load a code sketch that reads the MPU-6050 and prints the data.

Open the Serial Plotter (under "Tools" in the Arduino IDE).

You will see a live graph of the X, Y, and Z-axis data. Tap the sensor, and you will see the spike on the graph. This is how you find your CRASH_THRESHOLD value without Proteus.

3. 🏁 The 5-Week Prototype Timeline
Here is a new timeline focused on the Wi-Fi method.

Week 1: Setup ESP8266 & IFTTT
This week is all about the new "brain" and "alert" system.

Day 1-2: Install the ESP8266 board definitions in your Arduino IDE. Get a basic "Blink" sketch running.

Day 3-4: Write a simple sketch to make the ESP8266 connect to your phone's Wi-Fi hotspot.

Day 5-6: Create your free IFTTT account.

Create a new Applet.

For "If This," choose "Webhooks" (and "Receive a web request"). Give it an event name like crash_detected.

For "Then That," choose "SMS" or "Notification."

Day 7: Write a test sketch for your ESP8266 that includes a "test button." When you press the button, it sends the Webhook to your IFTTT link. Your goal: Press the button and get an SMS on your phone.

Week 2: Integrate Sensors (Accelerometer & GPS)
Now you add the "eyes and ears."

Day 1-3: Connect the MPU-6050 (Accelerometer). Load an example sketch to read the X, Y, and Z values. Use the Serial Plotter to see the data. Tap the sensor and see the spikes. Decide on a realistic CRASH_THRESHOLD value (e.g., a G-force value much higher than just dropping it).

Day 4-6: Connect the NEO-6M (GPS Module). Load a basic GPS sketch and print the latitude/longitude to the Serial Monitor. (This may require taking it near a window for a satellite lock).

Day 7: Write a small function that can read and "package" the GPS data into a string.

Week 3: Code Integration & Bench Testing
This is where it all comes together on your desk.

Combine all your code:

The main loop() will constantly read the MPU-6050.

if (gforce > CRASH_THRESHOLD):

If true, it immediately calls a function to get_gps_location().

Then, it calls the send_ifttt_alert(location_data) function.

Test it: Power up the ESP8266 (connected to your phone's hotspot).

Simulate a crash: Sharply tap the MPU-6050.

Check your phone: You should receive the IFTTT alert. Check the message: Does it contain the correct (or last-known) GPS coordinates?